Just as in plants, there are two modes by which animals reproduce. These are Sexual reproduction, and Asexual reproduction. In animals also, males and females have different reproductive parts or organs. Like plants, the reproductive parts in animals also produce gametes that fuse to form a zygote. It is the zygote which develops into a new individual. This type of reproduction beginning from the fusion of male and female gametes is called sexual reproduction. The male reproductive organs include a pair of testes (singular, testis), two sperm ducts and a penis. The male reproductive organs produce the male gametes called sperms. Millions of sperms are produced by The male reproductive organs. Though sperms are very small in size, each has a head, a middle piece and a tail. The male reproductive organs are a pair of ovaries, oviducts (fallopian tubes) and the uterus. The ovary produces female gametes called ova (eggs). In human beings, a single matured egg is released into the oviduct by one of the ovaries every month. Uterus is the part where development of one of the ovaries takes place. Like the sperm, an egg is also a single cell. The first step in the process of reproduction is the fusion of a sperm and an ovum. When sperms come in contact with an egg, one of sperms may fuse with an egg. Such fusion of an egg and the sperm is called fertilisation. During fertilisation, the nuclei of the sperm and the egg fuse to form a single nucleus. This results in the formation of a fertilised egg or zygote. The process of fertilisation is the meeting of an egg cell from the mother and a sperm cell from the father. So, the new individual inherits some characteristics from the mother and some from the father. Fertilisation which takes place inside the female body is called internal fertilisation. Internal fertilisation occurs in many animals including humans, cows, dogs and hens. During spring or rainy season, frogs and toads move to ponds and slowflowing streams. When the male and female come together in water, the female lays hundreds of eggs. Unlike hen’s egg, frog’s egg is not covered by a shell and frog’s egg is comparatively very delicate. A layer of jelly holds the eggs together and provides protection to the eggs. As the eggs are laid, the male deposits sperms over the eggs. Each sperm swims randomly in water with the help of its long tail. The sperms come in contact with the eggs. This results in Fertilisation. This type of fertilisation in which the fusion of a male and a female gamete takes place outside the body of the female is called external fertilisation. It is very common in aquatic animals such as fish, starfish, etc. Fertilisation results in the formation of zygote which begins to develop into an embryo. zygote divides repeatedly to give rise to a ball of cells. cells then begin to form groups that develop into different tissues and organs of the body. This developing structure is termed an embryo. an embryo gets embedded in the wall of the uterus for further development. an embryo continues to develop in the uterus. an embryo gradually develops body parts such as hands, legs, head, eyes, ears etc. The stage of the embryo in which all the body parts can be identified is called a foetus. When the development of a foetus is complete, the mother gives birth to the baby. Internal fertilisation takes place in hens also. Soon after fertilisation, zygote divides repeatedly and travels down the oviduct. As it travels down, many protective layers are formed around it. The hard shell that you see in a hen’s egg is one such protective layer. After The hard shell that you see in a hen’s egg is formed around the developing embryo, The hard shell that you see in a hen’s egg finally lays a hen’s egg. the developing embryo takes about 3 weeks to develop into a chick. You must have seen The hard shell that you see in a hen’s egg sitting on the eggs to provide sufficient warmth. After a chick is completely developed a chick bursts open The hard shell that you see in a hen’s egg. In animals which undergo external fertilisation, development of the developing embryo takes place outside the female body. The embryos continue to grow within The embryos egg coverings. After The embryos develop, the eggs hatch. The animals which give birth to young ones are called viviparous animals. The animals which give birth to young ones are called oviparous animals. The eggs of a few animals are easy to observe because The eggs of a few animals mothers lay The eggs of a few animals outside The eggs of a few animals bodies. These are examples of oviparous animals. But you would not be able to collect the eggs of a dog, cow or cat. This is because they do not lay eggs. The mother gives birth to the young ones. These are examples of viviparous animals. The new individuals which are born or hatched from the eggs continue to grow till The new individuals which are born or hatched from the eggs become adults. In some animals, the young ones may look very different from the adults. In the case of tadpoles, the young ones transform into adults capable of jumping and swimming. The transformation of the larva into an adult through drastic changes is called metamorphosis. In each hydra, there may be one or more bulges. one or more bulges are the developing new individuals and one or more bulges are called buds. Recall the presence of buds in yeast. In hydra too the developing new individuals develop as outgrowths from a single parent. This type of reproduction in which only a single parent is involved is called asexual reproduction. Since new individuals develop from the buds in hydra, This type of reproduction in which only a single parent is involved is called budding. Another method of asexual reproduction is observed in the microscopic organism, amoeba. Amoeba begins the process of reproduction by the division of Amoeba nucleus into two nuclei. This is followed by division of This body into two, each part receiving a nucleus. Finally, two amoebae are produced from one parent amoeba. This type of asexual reproduction in which an animal reproduces by dividing into two individuals is called binary fission. Apart from budding and binary fission, there are other methods by which a single parent reproduces young ones.