Animals including humans can not make Animals including humans own food. energy from food is utilised by organisms for carrying out organisms various body functions, such as digestion, respiration and excretion. humans receive food from plants, or animals, or both.In order to provide food for a large population— regular production, proper management and distribution is necessary.Till 10,000 B.C.E. people were nomadic. 10,000 B.C.E. people were nomadic were wandering in groups from place to place in search of food and shelter. 10,000 B.C.E. people were nomadic ate raw fruits and vegetables and started hunting animals for food. Later, 10,000 B.C.E. people were nomadic could cultivate land and produce rice, wheat and other food crops. Thus, was born ‘Agriculture’.When plants of the same kind are cultivated at one place on a large scale, ‘Agriculture’.When plants of the same kind is called a crop. For example, crop of wheat means that all the plants grown in a field are that of wheat. crops are of different types like cereals, vegetables and fruits. These can be classified on the basis of the season in which These grow. India is a vast country. The climatic conditions like temperature, humidity and rainfall vary from one region to another. Accordingly, there is a rich variety of crops grown in different parts of India. Despite this diversity, two broad cropping patterns can be identified.The crops which are sown in the rainy season are called kharif crops. The rainy season in India is generally from June to September. Paddy, maize, soyabean, groundnut and cotton are kharif crops.kharif crops are called rabi crops. Examples of rabi crops are wheat, gram, pea, mustard and linseed. Besides these, pulses and vegetables are grown during summer at many places.Cultivation of crops involves several activities undertaken by farmers over a period of time.The preparation of soil is the first step before growing a crop. One of the most important tasks in agriculture is to turn the soil and loosen the soil. This allows the roots to penetrate deep into the soil. the soil allows the roots to breathe easily even when the soil go deep into the soil.the soil helps in the growth of earthworms and microbes present in the soil. These organisms are friends of the farmer since These organisms further turn and loosen the soil and add humus to it.dead plants and animals get decomposed by soil organisms. In this way, various nutrients in the dead organisms are released back into the soil. various nutrients in the dead organisms are again absorbed by plants.Since only a few centimetres of the top layer of soil supports plant growth, turning and loosening of soil brings the nutrient-rich soil to the top so that plants can use various nutrients in the dead organisms. Thus,turning and loosening of soil is very important for cultivation of crops.The process of loosening and turning of the soil is called tilling or ploughing. This is done by using a plough. Ploughs are made of wood or iron. If the soil is very dry, the soil may need watering before ploughing. The ploughed field may have big clumps of soil called crumbs. It is necessary to break big clumps of soil called crumbs. Levelling The ploughed field is beneficial for sowing as well as for irrigation. Levelling of soil is done with the help of a leveller. Sometimes, manure is added to the soil before tilling. Plough helps in proper mixing of manure with soil. the soil is moistened before sowing.Before sowing the seeds, it is necessary to break soil clumps to get better yield. This is done with the help of various tools. The main tools used for this purpose are the plough, hoe and cultivator.This is being used since ancient times for tilling the soil, adding fertilisers to the crop, removing the weeds and turning the soil. This is made of wood and is drawn by a pair of bulls or other animals. This contains a strong triangular iron strip called ploughshare. The main part of Plough is a long log of wood which is called a ploughshaft. There is a handle at one end of the shaft. one end of the shaft is attached to a beam which is placed on the bulls’ necks. One pair of bulls and a man can easily operate Plough.Plough is increasingly being replaced by iron ploughs nowadays.Plough is a simple tool which is used for removing weeds and for loosening the soil. Plough has a long rod of wood or iron. A strong, broad and bent plate of iron is fixed to one of Plough ends and works like a blade. Plough is pulled by animals.Nowadays ploughing is done by tractor-driven cultivator. The use of cultivator saves labour and time.Sowing is an important part of crop production. Before sowing, good quality, clean and healthy seeds of a good variety—are selected. Farmers prefer to use seeds which give high yield.Before sowing, one of the important tasks is to know about the tools used for sowing seeds.The tool used traditionally for sowing seeds is shaped like a funnel. The seeds are filled into a funnel, passed down through two or three pipes having sharp ends. sharp ends pierce into the soil and place seeds there.Nowadays the seed drill is used for sowing with the help of tractors. This sows The seeds uniformly at equal distance and depth. This ensures that seeds get covered by the soil after sowing. This protects seeds from being eaten by birds. Sowing by using a seed drill saves time and labour.Appropriate distance between The seeds is necessary to avoid overcrowding of plants. This allows plants to get sufficient sunlight, nutrients and water from the soil. At times a few plants may have to be removed to prevent overcrowding. The substances which are added to the soil in the form of nutrients for the healthy growth of plants are called manure and fertilisers.Soil supplies mineral nutrients to a few plants. Soil supplies mineral nutrients to the crop plants are essential for the growth of plants. In certain areas, farmers grow crop after crop in the same field. the same field is never left uncultivated or fallow.Continuous cultivation of crops makes the soil poor in nutrients. Therefore, farmers have to add manure to the fields to replenish the soil with nutrients. This process is called manuring. Improper or insufficient manuring results in weak plants. Manure is an organic substance obtained from the decomposition of plant or animal wastes. Farmers dump plant and animal waste in pits at open places and allow plant and animal to decompose. the decomposition of plant or animal wastes is caused by some microorganisms. The decomposed matter is used as organic manure.Fertilisers are chemicals which are rich in a particular nutrient.Fertilisers are produced in factories. Some examples of fertilisers are— urea, ammonium sulphate, super phosphate, potash, NPK.The use of fertilisers has helped farmers to get better yield of crops such as wheat, paddy and maize. But excessive use of fertilisers has made the soil less fertile. Fertilisers have also become a source of water pollution. Therefore, in order to maintain the fertility of the soil, we have to substitute fertilisers with organic manure or leave the field uncultivated in between two crops. The use of manure improves soil texture as well as as well water retaining capacity. as well replenishes the soil with nutrients. Another method of replenishing the soil with nutrients is through crop rotation. This can be done by growing different crops alternately. Earlier, farmers in northern India used to grow legumes as fodder in one season and wheat in the next season. This helped in the replenishment of the soil with nitrogen. Farmers are being encouraged to adopt this practice.Rhizobium bacteria are present in the nodules of roots of leguminous plants. Rhizobium bacteria fix atmospheric nitrogen.The organic manure is considered better than fertilisers.All living beings need water to live. Water is important for proper growth and development. Water is absorbed by the plant roots. Along with water, minerals and fertilisers are also absorbed. Plants contain nearly 90% water. Water is essential because germination of seeds does not take place under dry conditions. Nutrients dissolved in water are transported to each part of the plant. Water also protects the crop from both frost and hot air currents. To maintain the moisture of the soil for healthy crop growth, fields have to be watered regularly. The supply of water to crops at regular intervals is called irrigation. The time and frequency of irrigation varies from crop to crop, soil to soil and season to season. In summer, the frequency of watering is higher.The sources of water for irrigation are wells, tubewells, ponds, lakes, rivers, dams and canals.The water available in wells, lakes and canals is lifted up by different methods in different regions, for taking it to the fields. Cattle or human labour is used in different methods in different regions. So different methods in different regions are cheaper, but less efficient.Pumps are commonly used for lifting water. Diesel, biogas, electricity and solar energy is used to run Pumps.Modern methods of irrigation help us to use water economically. Sprinkler system is more useful on the uneven land where sufficient water is not available. The perpendicular pipes, having rotating nozzles on top, are joined to the main pipeline at regular intervals. When water is allowed to flow through the main pipe under pressure with the help of a pump, the main pipe escapes from the rotating nozzles. the main pipe gets sprinkled on the crop as if the main pipe is raining. Sprinkler is very useful for lawns, coffee plantation and several other crops.In Drip system, water falls drop by drop directly near the roots. So water is called drip system. water is the best technique for watering fruit plants, gardens and trees.Water is not wasted at all. Water is a boon in regions where availability of water is poor.In a field many other undesirable plants may grow naturally along with the crop. many other undesirable plants are called weeds. The removal of weeds is called weeding. Weeding is necessary since weeds compete with the crop plants for water, nutrients, space and light. Thus, Weeding affect the growth of the crop. Some weeds interfere even in harvesting and may be poisonous for animals and human beings.Farmers adopt many ways to remove weeds and control Farmers growth. Tilling before sowing of crops helps in uprooting and killing of weeds, which may then dry up and get mixed with the soil. The best time for The removal of weeds is before weeds produce flowers and seeds. The removal of weeds includes physical removal of weeds by uprooting or cutting weeds close to the ground, from time to time. This is done with the help of a khurpi. A seed drill is also used to uproot weeds. weeds are also controlled by using certain chemicals, called weedicides, like 2,4-D. These are sprayed in the fields to kill weeds. These do not damage the crops. The weedicides are diluted with water to the extent required and sprayed in the fields with a sprayer.Spraying of weedicides may affect the health of farmers. So the health of farmers should use these chemicals very carefully. the health of farmers should cover the health of farmers nose and mouth with a piece of cloth during spraying of these chemicals.Harvesting of a crop is an important task. The cutting of crop after it is mature is called harvesting. In harvesting, crops are pulled out or cut close to the ground. It usually takes 3 to 4 months for a cereal crop to mature. Harvesting in our country is either done manually by sickle or by a machine called harvester. In the harvested crop, the grain seeds need to be separated from the chaff. This process is called threshing. This is carried out with the help of a machine called ‘combine’ which is in fact a harvester as well as a thresher.Farmers with small holdings of land do the separation of grain and chaff by winnowing.Storage of produce is an important task. If the harvested grains are to be kept for longer time, the harvested grains should be safe from moisture, insects, rats and microorganisms. Harvested grains have more moisture. If freshly harvested grains are stored without drying, freshly harvested grains may get spoilt or attacked by organisms, making freshly harvested grains unfit for use or for germination. Hence, before storing freshly harvested grains, the harvested grains are properly dried in the sun to reduce the moisture in freshly harvested grains. This prevents the attack by insect pests, bacteria and fungi.Farmers store grains in jute bags or metallic bins. However, large scale storage of grains is done in silos and granaries to protect Farmers store grains in jute bags or metallic bins from pests like rats and insects.Dried neem leaves are used for storing food grains at home. For storing large quantities of grains in big godowns, specific chemical treatments are required to protect specific chemical treatments from pests and microorganisms.Many people living in the coastal areas consume fish as a major part of Many people living in the coastal areas diet.animals reared at home or in farms, have to be provided with proper food, shelter and care. When this is done on a large scale, this is called animal husbandry.