Growth begins from the day one is born. But upon crossing the age of 10 or 11, there is a sudden spurt in growth which becomes noticeable. The changes taking place in the body are part of growing up. They indicate that you are no longer a child but are on the way to becoming an adult. Growing up is a natural process. The period of life, when the body undergoes changes, leading to reproductive maturity, is called adolescence. Adolescence begins around the age of 11 and lasts upto 18 or 19 years of age. Since this period covers the ‘teens’ (13 to 18 or 19 years of age), adolescents are also called ‘teenagers’. In girls, adolescence may begin a year or two earlier than in boys. Also, the period of adolescence varies from person to person. The human body undergoes several changes during adolescence. several changes mark the onset of puberty. The most important change which marks puberty is that boys and girls become capable of reproduction. Puberty ends when an adolescent reaches reproductive maturity. The most conspicuous change during puberty is the sudden increase in height. At this time the long bones, that is, the bones of the arms and the legs elongate and make a person tall. Initially, girls grow faster than boys but by about 18 years of age, both reach girls maximum height. The rate of growth in height varies in different individuals. Some may grow suddenly at puberty and then slow down, while others may grow gradually. All parts of The human body do not grow at the same rate. Sometimes the arms and legs or hands and feet of adolescents look oversized and out of proportion with The human body. But soon the other parts catch up and result in a proportionate body. You must have noticed that height of an individual is more or less similar to that of some family member. This is because height depends on the genes inherited from parents. It is, however, very important to eat the right kind of food during these growing years. This helps the bones, muscles and other parts of The human body get adequate nourishment for growth. You will find nutritional needs of adolescents discussed later in the lesson. At puberty, the voice box or the larynx begins to grow. Boys develop larger voice boxes. The growing voice box in boys can be seen as a protruding part of the throat called Adam’s apple. In girls, the larynx is hardly visible from the outside because of the larynx small size. Generally, girls have a high pitched voice, whereas boys have a deep voice. In adolescent boys, sometimes, the muscles of the growing voice box go out of control and a high pitched voice becomes hoarse. This state may remain for a few days or weeks after which a high pitched voice becomes normal. During puberty the secretion of sweat glands and sebaceous glands (oil glands) increases. Many young people get acne and pimples on the face at this time because of the increased activity of these glands in the skin. At puberty, male sex organs like the testes and penis develop completely. The testes also begin to produce sperms. In girls, the ovaries enlarge and eggs begin to mature. Also ovaries start releasing mature eggs. Adolescence is also a period of change in a person’s way of thinking. Adolescents are more independent than before and are also self conscious. Intellectual development takes place and Adolescents tend to spend considerable time thinking. In fact, it is often the time in one’s life when the brain has the greatest capacity for learning. Sometimes, however, an adolescent may feel insecure while trying to adjust to the changes in the body and mind. But as adolescent learners, you should know that there is no reason to feel insecure. These changes are a natural part of growing up. In girls, breasts begin to develop at puberty and boys begin to grow facial hair, that is, moustaches and beard. As these features help to distinguish the male from the female the male are called secondary sexual characters. Boys also develop hair on Boys chest. In both, boys and girls, hair grows under the arms and in the region above the thighs or the pubic region. The changes which occur at adolescence are controlled by hormones. Hormones are chemical substances. Hormones are secretions from endocrine glands, or endocrine system. The male hormone or testosterone begins to be released by the testes at the onset of puberty. This causes changes in boys about which you have just learnt, for example, the growth of facial hair. Once puberty is reached in girls, ovaries begin to produce the female hormone or estrogen which makes the breasts develop. Milk secreting glands or mammary glands develop inside the breasts. The production of these hormones is under the control of another hormone secreted from an endocrine gland called pituitary gland. Endocrine glands release hormones into the bloodstream to reach a particular body part called target site. The target site responds to another hormone secreted from an endocrine gland called pituitary gland. There are many endocrine glands or ductless glands in the body. Endocrine glands release hormones into the bloodstream to reach a particular body part called target site. The target site responds to another hormone secreted from an endocrine gland called pituitary gland. There are many endocrine glands or ductless glands in the body. The testes and ovaries secrete sex hormones. You have just learnt that sex hormones are responsible for the male and female secondary sexual characters. Further, sex hormones are under the control of hormones from the pituitary gland. The pituitary secretes many hormones, one of which makes ova mature in the ovaries and sperms form in the testes. Adolescents become capable of reproduction when Adolescents testes and ovaries begin to produce gametes. The capacity for maturation and production of gametes lasts for a much longer time in males than in females. In females, the reproductive phase of life begins at puberty (10 to 12 years of age) and generally lasts till the age of approximately 45 to 50 years. The ova begin to mature with the onset of puberty. One ovum matures and is released by one of the ovaries once in about 28 to 30 days. During this period, the wall of the uterus becomes thick so as to receive the egg, in case the uterus is fertilised and begins to develop. This results in pregnancy. If fertilisation does not occur, the released egg, and the thickened lining of the uterus along with the uterus blood vessels are shed off. This causes bleeding in women which is called menstruation. Menstruation occurs once in about 28 to 30 days. The first menstrual flow begins at puberty and is termed menarche. At 45 to 50 years of age, the menstrual cycle stops. Stoppage of menstruation is termed menopause. Initially, menstrual cycle may be irregular. It take some time to become regular. Menstrual cycle is controlled by hormones. Menstrual cycle includes the maturation of the egg, Menstrual cycle release, thickening of uterine wall and uterine wall breakdown if pregnancy does not occur. In case the egg is fertilised the egg begins to divide and then gets embedded in the uterus for further development. Inside the fertilised egg or zygote is the instruction for determining the sex of the baby. the instruction for determining the sex of the baby is present in the thread-like structures, called chromosomes in the fertilised egg. All human beings have 23 pairs of chromosomes in the nuclei of All human beings cells. Two chromosomes out of All human beings are the sex chromosomes, named X and Y. A female has two X chromosomes, while a male has one X and one Y chromosome. The gametes (egg and sperm) have only one set of chromosomes. the egg always has one X chromosome. But sperms are of two kinds. One kind has an X chromosome, and the other kind has a Y chromosome. When a sperm containing X chromosome fertilises the egg, the zygote would have two X chromosomes and develop into a female child. If a sperm containing X chromosome contributes a Y chromosome to the egg at fertilisation, the zygote would develop into a male child. The hormones secreted by the pituitary stimulate testes and ovaries to produce ovaries hormones. You have already learnt that the pituitary gland is an endocrine gland. the pituitary gland is an endocrine gland is attached to the brain. Apart from the pituitary, the testes and the ovaries, there are other endocrine glands in the body such as thyroid, pancreas and adrenals. Adrenals also produce the hormone adrenalin. It helps the body to adjust to stress when one is very angry, embarrassed or worried. Thyroid and adrenals secrete Thyroid and adrenals hormones when Thyroid and adrenals receive orders from the pituitary through the pituitary hormones. the pituitary also secretes growth hormone which is necessary for the normal growth of a person. This change from larva to adult is called metamorphosis. Metamorphosis in insects is controlled by insect hormones. In a frog, Metamorphosis in insects is controlled by thyroxine, the hormone produced by thyroid. Thyroxine production requires the presence of iodine in water. If the water in which the tadpoles are growing does not contain sufficient iodine, the tadpoles cannot become adults. The physical and mental well being of an individual is regarded as an individual’s health. To keep the body healthy, every human being, at any age, needs to have a balanced diet. The person must also observe personal hygiene and undertake adequate physical exercise. During adolescence, however, these become even more essential as the body is growing. Adolescence is a stage of rapid growth and development. Hence the diet for an adolescent has to be carefully planned. You have already learnt what a balanced diet is. Recall that a balanced diet means that the meals include proteins, carbohydrates, fats and vitamins in requisite proportions. Our Indian meal of roti/rice, dal (pulses) and vegetables is a balanced meal. Milk is a balanced food in Milk. Fruits also provide nourishment. For infants, mother’s milk provides all the nourishment that mother’s milk need. Iron builds blood and iron-rich food such as leafy vegetables, jaggery, meat, citrus, Indian gooseberry (amla) are good for adolescents. Everyone should have a bath at least once everyday. It is more necessary for teenagers because the increased activity of sweat glands sometimes makes the body smelly. All parts of the body should be washed and cleaned everyday. If cleanliness is not maintained there are chances of catching bacterial infection. Girls should take special care of cleanliness during the time of menstrual flow. Girls should keep track of Girls menstrual cycle and be prepared for the onset of menstruation. Use sanitary napkin or clean homemade pads. Change pads after every 4–5 hours as per the requirement. Walking and playing in fresh air keeps the body fit and healthy. All young boys and girls should take walks, exercise and play outdoor games. HIV virus can pass on to a normal person from an infected person by sharing the syringes used for injecting drugs. HIV virus can also be transmitted to an infant from the infected mother through an infant from the infected mother milk. HIV virus can also be transmitted through sexual contact with a person infected with HIV.