Robert Hooke took thin slices of cork and observed thin slices of cork under a microscope. Robert Hooke noticed partitioned boxes or compartments in the cork slice. partitioned boxes or compartments appeared like a honeycomb. Robert Hooke also noticed that one box was separated from the other by a wall or partition. Robert Hooke coined the term ‘cell’ for each box. What Robert Hooke observed as boxes or cells in cork were actually dead cells. Cells of living organisms could be observed only after the discovery of improved microscopes. Very little was known about the cell for the next 150 years after Robert Hooke’s observations. Today, we know a lot about cell structure and its functions because of improved microscopes having high magnification. organisms differ from one another but all are made up of cells. Cells in the living organisms are complex living structures unlike non-living bricks. There are millions of living organisms. millions of living organisms are of different shapes and sizes. millions of living organisms organs also vary in shape, size and number of cells. Let us study about some of millions of living organisms. Organisms made of more than one cell are called multicellular (multi : many; cellular : cell) organisms. The number of cells being less in smaller organisms does not, in any way, affect the functioning of many; cellular : cell) organisms. You will be surprised to know that an organism with billions of cells begins life as a single cell which is the fertilised egg. The fertilised egg cell multiplies and the number of cells increase as development proceeds. many; cellular : cell) organisms are called unicellular organisms. A single-celled organism performs all the necessary functions that multicellular organisms perform. A single-celled organism, like amoeba, captures and digests food, respires, excretes, grows and reproduces. Similar functions in multicellular organisms are carried out by groups of specialised cells forming different tissues. Tissues, in turn, form organs. amoeba has no definite shape, unlike other organisms. amoeba keeps on changing amoeba shape. Observe the projections of varying lengths protruding out of amoeba body. These are called pseudopodia. A white blood cell (WBC) in human blood is another example of a single cell which can change A white blood cell (WBC) in human blood shape. But while WBC is a cell, amoeba is a full fledged organism capable of independent existence. Generally, cells are round, spherical or elongated . Some cells are long and pointed at both ends. Some cells exhibit a spindle shape. Cells sometimes are quite long. Some are branched like the nerve cell or a neuron. A white blood cell (WBC) in human blood receives and transfers messages, thereby helping to control and coordinate the working of different parts of the body. Components of A white blood cell (WBC) in human blood are enclosed in a membrane. a membrane provides shape to the cells of plants and animals. Cell wall is an additional covering over a membrane in plant cells. Cell wall gives shape and rigidity to Some cells. Bacterial cell also has a cell wall. The size of cells in living organisms may be as small as a millionth of a metre (micrometre or micron) or may be as large as a few centimetres. However, most of Some cells are microscopic in size and are not visible to the unaided eye. Bacterial cell need to be enlarged or magnified by a microscope. Bacterial cell is 0.1 to 0.5 micrometre in bacteria. The largest cell measuring 170 mm ×130 mm, is the egg of an ostrich. The size of the cells has no relation with the size of the body of the animal or plant. It is not necessary that the cells in the elephant be much bigger than those in a rat. The size of Bacterial cell is related to Bacterial cell function. For example, nerve cells, both in the elephant and rat, are long and branched. the elephant and rat perform its function, that of transferring messages. Each organ is further made up of smaller parts called tissues. A tissue is a group of similar cells performing a specific function. Paheli realised that an organ is made up of tissues which in turn, are made up of cells. The cell in a living organism is the basic structural unit. The basic components of a cell are cell membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus. cytoplasm and nucleus are enclosed within the cell membrane, also called the plasma membrane. the plasma membrane separates cells from one another and also the cell from the surrounding medium. the plasma membrane is porous and allows the movement of substances or materials both inward and outward. The boundary of the onion cell is the cell membrane covered by another thick covering called the cell wall. The central dense round body in the centre is called the nucleus. The jelly-like substance between the nucleus and the plasma membrane is called cytoplasm. there is an outer thick layer in cells of plants called cell wall. an outer thick layer in cells of plants called cell wall is required by plants for protection. Plant cells need protection against variations in temperature, high wind speed, atmospheric moisture etc. Plant cells are exposed to these variations because Plant cells cannot move. Cells can be observed in the leaf peel of Tradescantia, Elodea or Rhoeo. You can prepare a slide as in the case of onion. Cytoplasm is the jelly-like substance present between the cell membrane and the nucleus. Various other components, or organelles, of cells are present in Cytoplasm. Various other components, or organelles, of cells are mitochondria, golgi bodies, ribosomes, etc. You will learn about Various other components, or organelles, of cells in later classes. Nucleus is an important component of the living cell. Nucleus is generally spherical and located in the centre of the cell. Nucleus can be stained and seen easily with the help of a microscope. Nucleus is separated from Cytoplasm by a membrane called the nuclear membrane. a membrane called the nuclear membrane is also porous and allows the movement of materials between the cytoplasm and the inside of Nucleus. With a microscope of higher magnification, we can see a smaller spherical body in Nucleus. a smaller spherical body in the nucleus is called the nucleolus. In addition, nucleus contains thread-like structures called chromosomes. These carry genes and help in inheritance or transfer of characters from the parents to the offspring. The chromosomes can be seen only when the cell divides. Nucleus, in addition to its role in inheritance, acts as control centre of the activities of the cell. The entire content of a living cell is known as Protoplasm. The entire content of a living cell includes the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Protoplasm is called the living substance of the cell. Vacuole could be single and big as in an onion cell. Cheek cells have smaller vacuoles. Vacuoles are common in plant cells. Vacuoles in animal cells are much smaller. There are several small coloured bodies in the cytoplasm of the cells of Tradescantia leaf. several small coloured bodies in the cytoplasm of the cells of Tradescantia leaf are scattered in the cytoplasm of the leaf cells. several small coloured bodies in the cytoplasm of the cells of Tradescantia leaf are called plastids. several small coloured bodies in the cytoplasm of the cells of Tradescantia leaf are of different colours. Some of several small coloured bodies in the cytoplasm of the cells of Tradescantia leaf contain green pigment called chlorophyll. Green coloured plastids are called chloroplasts. Green coloured plastids provide green colour to the leaves. You may recall that chlorophyll in the chloroplasts of leaves, is essential for photosynthesis.