The land of India displays great physical variation. Geologically, the Peninsular Plateau constitutes one of the ancient landmasses on the earth’s surface. It was supposed to be one of the most stable land blocks. The Himalayas and the Northern Plains are the most recent landforms. From the view point of geology, Himalayan mountains form an unstable zone. The whole mountain system of Himalaya represents a very youthful topography with high peaks, deep valleys and fast flowing rivers. the Northern Plains are formed of alluvial deposits. the Peninsular Plateau is composed of igneous and metamorphic rocks with gently rising hills and wide valleys. The Himalayas and the Northern Plains mountains stretch over the northern borders of India. The whole mountain system of Himalaya ranges run in a west-east direction from the Indus to the Brahmaputra. Himalayas represent the loftiest and one of the most rugged mountain barriers of the world. the most rugged mountain barriers of the world form an arc, which covers a distance of about 2,400 Km. the most rugged mountain barriers of the world width varies from 400 Km in Kashmir to 150 Km in Arunachal Pradesh. The altitudinal variations are greater in the eastern half than those in the western half. Himalaya consists of three parallel ranges in Himalaya longitudinal extent. A number of valleys lie between these ranges. The northern-most range is known as the Great or Inner Himalayas or the Himadri. The northern-most range is the most continuous range consisting of the loftiest peaks with an average height of 6,000 metres. The northern-most range contains all prominent Himalayan peaks. The folds of Himalayas are asymmetrical in nature. The core of this part of Himalayas is composed of granite. The core of this part of Himalayas is perennially snow bound, and a number of glaciers descend from The northern-most range. The range lying to the south of the Himadri forms the most rugged mountain system and is known as Himachal or lesser Himalaya. The ranges are mainly composed of highly compressed and altered rocks. The altitude varies between 3,700 and 4,500 metres and the average width is of 50 Km. While the Pir Panjal range forms the longest and the most important range, the Dhaula Dhar and the Mahabharat ranges are also prominent ones. The range lying to the south of the Himadri consists of the famous valley of Kashmir, the Kangra and Kullu Valley in Himachal Pradesh. This region is well-known for This region hill stations. The outer-most range of Himalayas Himalayas is called the Shiwaliks. They extend over a width of 10-50 Km and have an altitude varying between 900 and 1100 metres. These ranges are composed of unconsolidated sediments brought down by rivers from the main Himalayan ranges located farther north. These ranges are covered with thick gravel and alluvium. The longitudinal valley lying between lesser Himalaya and the Shiwaliks are known as Duns. Dehra Dun, Kotli Dun and Patli Dun are some of Duns. Besides the longitudinal divisions, Himalayas have been divided on the basis of regions from west to east. the longitudinal divisions have been demarcated by river valleys. For example, the part of Himalayas lying between Indus and Satluj has been traditionally known as Punjab Himalaya but Punjab Himalaya is also known regionally as Kashmir and Himachal Himalaya from west to east respectively. The part of Himalayas lying between Satluj and Kali rivers is known as Kumaon Himalayas. The Kali and Teesta rivers demarcate Kumaon Himalayas and the part lying between Teesta and Dihang rivers is known as Assam Himalayas. There are regional names also in these broad categories. Find out some regional names of Himalayas The Brahmaputra marks the eastern-most boundary of Himalayas. Beyond the Dihang gorge, Himalayas bend sharply to the south and spread along the eastern boundary of India. They are known as the Purvachal or the Eastern hills and mountains. These hills running through the north-eastern states are mostly composed of strong sandstones, which are sedimentary rocks. Covered with dense forests, These hills running through the north-eastern states mostly run as parallel ranges and valleys. The Purvachal comprises the Patkai hills, the Naga hills, the Manipur hills and the Mizo hills. The Northern Plain has been formed by the interplay of the three major river systems, namely — the Indus, the Ganga and The Brahmaputra along with the three major river systems, namely — the Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra tributaries. The Northern Plain is formed of alluvial soil. The deposition of alluvium in a vast basin lying at the foothills of the Himalaya over millions of years, formed this fertile plain. The deposition of alluvium in a vast basin lying at the foothills of the Himalaya over millions of years spreads over an area of 7 lakh sq. km. The plain being about 2400 km long and 240 to 320 km broad, is a densely populated physiographic division. With a rich soil cover combined with adequate water supply and favourable climate a rich soil cover is agriculturally a productive part of India. The rivers coming from northern mountains are involved in depositional work. In the lower course, due to gentle slope, the velocity of the river decreases, which results in the formation of riverine islands. The rivers in riverine islands lower course split into numerous channels due to the deposition of silt. numerous channels are known as distributaries. The Northern Plain is broadly divided into three sections. The Western part of The Northern Plain is referred to as the Punjab Plains. Formed by the Indus and The Northern Plain tributaries, the larger part of this plain lies in Pakistan. The Indus and Indus tributaries — the Jhelum, the Chenab, the Ravi, the Beas and the Satluj originate in the Himalaya. This section of The Northern Plain is dominated by the doabs. The Northern Plain extends between Ghaggar and Teesta rivers. The Northern Plain is spread over North India in Haryana, Delhi, U.P., Bihar, partly Jharkhand and West Bengal. In the East, particularly in Assam lies the Brahmaputra plain. the Punjab Plains are generally described as flat land with no variations in the Punjab Plains relief. It is not true. the Punjab Plains also have diverse relief features. According to the variations in relief features, the Punjab Plains can be divided into four regions. The rivers, after descending from the mountains deposit pebbles in a narrow belt of about 8 to 16 km in width lying parallel to the slopes of the Shiwaliks. the Shiwaliks is known as bhabar. All the streams disappear in this bhabar belt. South of this bhabar belt, Streams re-emerge and create a wet, swampy and marshy region known as terai. This was a thickly forested region full of wildlife. The forests have been cleared to create agricultural land and to settle migrants from Pakistan after partition. Locate Dudhwa National Park in a thickly forested region full of wildlife. The largest part of the northern plain is formed of older alluvium. The largest part of the northern plain lies above the floodplains of the rivers and presents a terracelike feature. The largest part of the northern plain is known as bhangar. The soil in a thickly forested region full of wildlife contains calcareous deposits, locally known as kankar. calcareous deposits, locally known as kankar are called khadar. calcareous deposits, locally known as kankar are renewed almost every year and so are fertile, thus, ideal for intensive agriculture. The Peninsular plateau is a tableland composed of the old crystalline, igneous and metamorphic rocks. The Peninsular plateau was formed due to the breaking and drifting of agricultural land and thus, making The Peninsular plateau a part of the oldest landmass. The Peninsular plateau has broad and shallow valleys and rounded hills. The Peninsular plateau consists of two broad divisions, namely, the Central Highlands and The Peninsular plateau. The part of The Peninsular plateau lying to the north of the Narmada river, covering a major area of The Peninsular plateau, is known as the Central Highlands. The Vindhyan range is bounded by the Satpura range on the south and the Aravalis on the northwest. The further westward extension gradually merges with the sandy and rocky desert of Rajasthan. The flow of the rivers draining this region, namely the Chambal, the Sind, the Betwa and the Ken is from southwest to northeast, thus indicating the slope. the Central Highlands are wider in the west but narrower in the east. The eastward extensions of The Peninsular plateau are locally known as the Bundelkhand and Baghelkhand. The Peninsular plateau marks the further eastward extension, drained by the Narmada river. The Peninsular plateau is a triangular landmass that lies to the south of the Narmada river. The Satpura range flanks The Peninsular plateau broad base in the north, while the Mahadev, the Kaimur hills and the Maikal range form The Peninsular plateau eastern extensions. Locate These hills running through the north-eastern states and ranges in the Physical map of India. The Peninsular plateau is higher in the west and slopes gently eastwards. An extension of The Peninsular plateau The Peninsular plateau is also visible in northeast, locally known as the Meghalaya, Karbi-Anglong Plateau and North Cachar Hills. It is separated by a fault from The Peninsular plateau. Three prominent hill ranges from the west to the East are the Garo, the Khasi and the Jaintia Hills. The Western Ghats and the Eastern Ghats mark the western and the eastern edges of The Peninsular plateau The Peninsular plateau respectively. The Western Ghats lie parallel to the Coromandel Coast. The Western Ghats are continuous and can be crossed through passes only. The Western Ghats are higher than the Eastern Ghats. The Western Ghats average elevation is 900– 1600 metres as against 600 metres of the Eastern Ghats. the Eastern Ghats stretch from the Mahanadi Valley to the Nigiris in the south. the Eastern Ghats are discontinuous and irregular and dissected by rivers draining into the Bay of West Bengal. The Western Ghats cause orographic rain by facing orographic rain bearing moist winds to rise along the western slopes of The Western Ghats. The Western Ghats are known by different local names. The height of The Western Ghats progressively increases from north to south. The highest peaks include the Anai Mudi (2,695 metres) and the Doda Betta (2,637 metres). Mahendragiri (1,501 metres) is the highest peak in the Eastern Ghats. Shevroy Hills and the Javadi Hills are located to the southeast of the Eastern Ghats. Locate the famous hill stations of Udagamandalam, popularly known as Ooty and the Kodaikanal. One of the distinct features of The Peninsular plateau is the black soil area known as Decean Trap. This is of volcanic origin, hence, the rocks are igneous. Actually, the rocks have denuded over time and are responsible for the formation of black soil. Shevroy Hills lie on the western and northwestern margins of The Peninsular plateau. These are highly eroded hills and are found as broken hills. These extend from Gujarat to Delhi in a southwest-northeast direction. The Indian desert lies towards the western margins of Shevroy Hills. The Indian desert is an undulating sandy plain covered with sand dunes. a thickly forested region full of wildlife receives very low rainfall below 150 mm per year. a thickly forested region full of wildlife has arid climate with low vegetation cover. Streams appear during the rainy season. Soon after Streams disappear into the sand as Streams do not have enough water to reach the Arabian Sea. Luni is the only large river in a thickly forested region full of wildlife. Barchans (crescent-shaped dunes) cover larger areas but longitudinal dunes become more prominent near the Indo-Pakistan boundary. If you visit Jaisalmer, you may go to see a group of barchans. The Peninsular plateau is flanked by stretch of narrow coastal strips, running along the Arabian Sea on the west and the Bay of Bengal on the East. the Coromandel Coast, sandwiched between The Western Ghats and the Arabian Sea, is a narrow plain. a narrow plain consists of three sections. The northern part of the Coromandel Coast is called the Konkan (Mumbai – Goa), the central stretch is called The Northern Plain, while the southern stretch is referred to as the Coromandel Coast. the Punjab Plains the Bay of Bengal are wide and level. In The northern part of the coast, the Punjab Plains is referred to as the Northern Circar, while the southern part is known as the Coromandel Coast. Large rivers, such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri have formed extensive delta on the Coromandel Coast. Lake Chilika is an important feature along the Coromandel Coast. Locate the Lakshadweep Islands group lying close to the Coromandel Coast. the Lakshadweep Islands group is composed of small coral isalnds. Earlier the Lakshadweep Islands group were known as Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindive. In 1973, the Lakshadweep Islands group were named as Lakshadweep. Lake Chilika covers small area of 32 sq km. Kavaratti island is the administrative headquarters of Lakshadweep. the Lakshadweep Islands group has great diversity of flora and fauna. The Pitti island, which is uninhabited, has a bird sanctuary. The Pitti island, which is uninhabited are Andaman and Nicobar islands. The Pitti island, which is uninhabited are bigger in size and are more numerous and scattered. the Lakshadweep Islands group is divided into two broad categories – The Andaman in the north and the Nicobar in the south. The Andaman in the north and the Nicobar in the south is believed that islands are an elevated portion of submarine mountains. islands are of great strategic importance for islands. There is great diversity of flora and fauna in the Lakshadweep Islands group too. islands lie close to equator and experience equatorial climate and has thick forest cover. submarine mountains are the major sources of water and forest wealth. the Punjab Plains are the granaries of islands. the Punjab Plains provide the base for early civilisations. The Peninsular plateau is a storehouse of minerals, which has played a crucial role in the industrialisation of islands. The coastal region and island groups provide sites for fishing and port activities. Thus, the diverse physical features of agricultural land have immense future possibilities of development.