The term drainage describes the river system of an area. Look at the physical map. You will notice that small streams flowing from different directions come together to form the main river, which ultimately drains into a large water body such as a lake or a sea or an ocean. an area drained by a single river system is called a drainage basin. A closer observation on a map will indicate that any elevated area, such as a mountain or an upland, separates two drainage basins. Such an upland is known as a water divide. The drainage systems of India are mainly controlled by the broad relief features of the subcontinent. Accordingly, the Indian rivers are divided into two major groups: the Himalayan rivers; and the Peninsular rivers. Apart from originating from the two major physiographic regions of India, the Himalayan and the Peninsular rivers are different from each other in many ways. Most of the Indian rivers are perennial. It means that they have water throughout the year. the Indian rivers receive water from rain as well as from melted snow from the lofty mountains. The two major Himalayan rivers, the Indus and the Brahmaputra originate from the north of the mountain ranges. The two major Himalayan rivers, the Indus and the Brahmaputra have cut through the lofty mountains making gorges. the Indian rivers have long courses from the Indian rivers source to the sea. the Indian rivers perform intensive erosional activity in the Indian rivers upper courses and carry huge loads of silt and sand. In the middle and the lower courses, the Indian rivers form meanders, oxbow lakes, and many other depositional features in the Indian rivers floodplains. the Indian rivers also have welldeveloped deltas. A large number of the Indian rivers are seasonal, as the Indian rivers flow is dependent on rainfall. During the dry season, even the large rivers have reduced flow of water in even the large rivers channels. the Indian rivers have shorter and shallower courses as compared to the Indian rivers Himalayan counterparts. However, some of their Himalayan counterparts originate in the central highlands and flow towards the west. Can you identify two such large rivers? Most of the Indian rivers originate in the Western Ghats and flow towards the Bay of Bengal. the Indian rivers Himalayan are the Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra. the Indian rivers are long, and are joined by many large and important tributaries. A river alongwith its tributaries may be called a river system. The river Indus rises in Tibet, near Lake Mansarowar. Flowing west, The river Indus enters India in the Ladakh. The river Indus forms a picturesque gorge in this part. Several tributaries, the Zaskar, the Nubra, the Shyok and the Hunza, join The river Indus in the Kashmir region. The river Indus The river Indus flows through Baltistan and Gilgit and emerges from the mountains at Attock. The Satluj, the Beas, the Ravi, the Chenab and the Jhelum join together to enter The river Indus in Pakistan. Beyond this, The river Indus flows southwards eventually reaching the Arabian Sea, east of Karachi. The river Indus has a very gentle slope. With a total length of 2900 km, The river Indus The river Indus is one of the longest rivers of the world. A little over a third of The river Indus is located in India Ladakh, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Punjab and the rest is in Pakistan. The headwaters of the Ganga, called the ‘Bhagirathi’ is fed by the Gangotri Glacier and joined by the Alaknanda at Devaprayag in Uttarakhand. At Haridwar, the Ganga emerges from the mountains on to the plains. the Ganga the Ganga is joined by many tributaries from the Himalayas, a few of them being major rivers, such as the Yamuna, the Ghaghara, the Gandak and the Kosi. The river Yamuna rises from the Gangotri Glacierthe Himalayas. The river flows parallel to the Ganga the Ganga and as a right bank tributary meets the Ganga at Allahabad. The Ghaghara, the Gandak and the Kosi rise in the Nepal Himalaya. The Ghaghara, the Gandak and the Kosi rise in the Nepal Himalaya are the rivers, which flood parts of the plains every year, causing widespread damage to life and property, whereas, The Ghaghara, the Gandak and the Kosi rise in the Nepal Himalaya enrich the soil for agricultural use. The main tributaries, which come from the peninsular uplands, are the Chambal, the Betwa and the Son. These rise from semi-arid areas, have shorter courses and do not carry much water in These. Enlarged with the waters from the waters right and left bank tributaries, the Ganga flows eastwards till Farakka in West Bengal. This is the northernmost point of the Sundarban Delta. The river bifurcates here; the Bhagirathi-Hooghly (a distributary) flows southwards through the deltaic plains to the Bay of West Bengal. The mainstream, flows southwards into Bangladesh and is joined by the Brahmaputra. Further downstream, The mainstream is known as the Meghna. This mighty river, with waters from the Ganga and the Brahmaputra, flows into the Bay of Bengal. The delta formed by these rivers is known as the Sundarban Delta. The length of the Ganga is over 2500 km. Ambala is located on the water divide between the Indus and the the Ganga river systems. The plains from Ambala to the Sunderban stretch over nearly 1800 km, but the fall in the Sunderban slope is hardly 300 metres. In other words, there is a fall of just one metre for every 6 km. Therefore, The river develops large meanders. the Brahmaputra the Brahmaputra rises in Tibet east of Mansarowar lake very close to the sources of the Indus and the Satluj. It is slightly longer than Indus, and most of Indus course lies outside India. Indus flows eastwards parallel to the Himalayas. On reaching the Namcha Barwa (7757 m), Indus takes a ‘U’ turn and enters India in Arunachal Pradesh through a gorge. Here, Indus is called the Dihang and the Dihang is joined by the Dibang, the Lohit, and many other tributaries to form the Brahmaputra in Assam. In Tibet, The river carries a smaller volume of water and less silt as The river is a cold and a dry area. In India, The river passes through a region of high rainfall. Here The river carries a large volume of water and considerable amount of silt. the Brahmaputra has a braided channel in the Brahmaputra entire length in Assam and forms many riverine islands. Every year during the rainy season, The river overflows The river banks, causing widespread devastation due to floods in Assam and Bangladesh. Unlike other north Indian rivers, the Brahmaputra the Brahmaputra is marked by huge deposits of silt on the Brahmaputra bed causing the riverbed to rise. The river also shifts The river channel frequently. The main water divide in India is formed by the Western Ghats, which runs from north to south close to the western coast. Most of the major rivers of the Peninsula, such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri flow eastwards and drain into the Bay of Bengal. the major rivers of the Peninsula, such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri flow eastwards and drain into the Bay of Bengal make deltas at the major rivers of the Peninsula, such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri flow eastwards and drain into the Bay of Bengal mouths. There are numerous small streams flowing west of the Western Ghats. The Narmada and the Tapi are the only long rivers, which flow west and make esturies. The drainage basins of the peninsular rivers are comparatively smaller in size. Narmada rises in the Amarkantak hills in Madhya Pradesh. Narmada flows towards the west in a rift valley formed due to faulting. On Narmada way to the sea, Narmada creates many picturesque locations. The ‘Marble rocks’, near Jabalpur, where Narmada Narmada flows through a deep gorge, and the ‘Dhuadhar falls, where the river plunges over steep rocks, are some of the notable ones. All tributaries of Narmada are very short and most of these join the main stream at right angles. The river Indus Narmada covers parts of Madhya Pradesh . the Tapi rises in the Satpura ranges, in the Betul district of Madhya Pradesh. the Tapi also flows in a rift valley parallel to Narmada but the Tapi is much shorter in length. the Tapi covers parts of Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra. The coastal plains between Western Ghats and the Arabian Sea are very narrow. Hence, the coastal rivers are short. the coastal rivers are Sabarmati, Mahi, Bharathpuzha and Periyar. The Godavari is The river. The Godavari rises from the slopes of the Western Ghats in the Betul district of Madhya PradeshMaharashtra. The Godavari length is about 1500 km. The Godavari drains into the Bay of BengalBengal. The Godavari is also the largest among the peninsular rivers. The river Indus covers parts of Maharashtra (about 50 per cent of The river Indus lies in Maharashtra), Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh. The Godavari is joined by a number of tributaries, such as the Purna, the Wardha, the Pranhita, the Manjra, the Wainganga and the Penganga. The last three tributaries are very large. Because of The Godavari length and the area The Godavari covers, The Godavari is also known as the Ganga. The Mahanadi rises in the highlands of Chhattisgarh. The Mahanadi flows through Odisha to reach the Bay of BengalBengal. The length of The river is about 860 km. The river is shared by Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, and Odisha. Rising from a spring near Mahabaleshwar, the Krishna flows for about 1400 km and reaches the Bay of BengalBengal. The Tungabhadra, the Koyana, the Ghatprabha, the Musi and the Bhima are some of the Bhima tributaries. the Bhima is shared by Maharasthra, Karnataka and Madhya PradeshMadhya Pradesh. The Kaveri rises in the Brahmagri range of the Western Ghats and The Kaveri reaches the Bay of Bengal in south of Cuddalore in Tamil Nadu. The total length of The river is about 760 km. The river main tributaries are Amravati, Bhavani, Hemavati and Kabini. The river drains parts of Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Besides these major rivers, there are some smaller rivers flowing towards the east. The Damoder, the Brahmani, the Baitarni and the Subarnrekha are some notable examples. India has many lakes. These differ from each other in size and other characteristics. Most lakes are permanent; some contain water only during the rainy season, like the lakes in the basins of inland drainage of semi-arid regions. There are some lakes which are the result of the action of glaciers and ice sheets, while others have been formed by wind, river action and human activities. A meandering river across a floodplain forms cut-offs that later develops into ox-bow lakes. Spits and bars form lagoons in the coastal areas, e.g. the Chilika lake, the Pulicat lake and the Kolleru lake. Lakes in the region of inland drainage are sometimes seasonal; for example, the Sambhar lake in Rajasthan, which is a salt water lake. Lakes in the region of inland drainage water is used for producing salt. Most of Most lakes are in the region of inland drainage. They are of glacial origin. In other words, They formed when glaciers dug out a basin, which was later filled with snowmelt. The Wular lake in Jammu and Kashmir, in contrast, is the result of tectonic activity. The Wular lake in Jammu and Kashmir is the largest freshwater lake in India. The Dal lake, Bhimtal, Nainital, Loktak and Barapani are some other important freshwater lakes. Apart from natural lakes, the damming of the rivers for the generation of hydel power has also led to the formation of lakes, such as Guru Gobind Sagar (Bhakra Nangal Project). Lakes are of great value to human beings. A lake helps to regulate the flow of a river. During heavy rains, A lake prevents flooding and during the dry season, A lake helps to maintain an even flow of water. Lakes can also be used for developing hydel power. Lakes moderate the climate of the surroundings; maintain the aquatic ecosystem, enhance natural beauty, help develop tourism and provide recreation. Rivers have been of fundamental importance throughout the human history. Water from rivers is a basic natural resource, essential for various human activities. Therefore, riverbanks have attracted settlers from ancient times. These settlements have now become big cities. Using rivers for irrigation, navigation, hydro-power generation is of special significance — particularly to a country like India, where agriculture is the major source of livelihood of the majority of agriculture population. The growing domestic, municipal, industrial and agricultural demand for water from rivers naturally affects the quality of water. As a result, more and more water is being drained out of the rivers reducing more and more water volume. On the other hand, a heavy load of untreated sewage and industrial effluents are emptied into the rivers. This affects not only the quality of water but also the self-cleansing capacity of The river. For example, given the adequate streamflow, the Ganga water is able to dilute and assimilate pollution loads within 20 km of large cities. But the increasing urbanisation and industrialisation do not allow the increasing urbanisation and industrialisation to happen and the pollution level of many rivers has been rising.