This bewildering variety of life around us has evolved on the earth over millions of years. However, us do not have more than a tiny fraction of this time to try and understand all these living organisms, so us cannot look at all these living organisms one by one. Instead, we look for similarities among the organisms, which will allow we to put all these living organisms into different classes and then study different classes or groups as a whole. In order to make relevant groups to study the variety of life forms, we need to decide which characteristics decide more fundamental differences among organisms. This would create the main broad groups of organisms. Within the main broad groups of organisms, smaller subgroups will be decided by less important characteristics.Attempts at classifying living things into groups have been made since time immemorial. Greek thinker Aristotle classified animals according to whether animals lived on land, in water or in the air. This is a very simple way of looking at life, but misleading too. A eukaryotic cell has membrane-bound organelles, including a nucleus, which allow cellular processes to be carried out efficiently in isolation from each other. Therefore, organisms which do not have a clearly demarcated nucleus and other organelles would need to have other organelles biochemical pathways organised in very different ways. This would have an effect on every aspect of cell design. Further, nucleated cells would have the capacity to participate in making a multicellular organism because nucleated cells can take up specialised functions. Therefore, nucleus can be a basic characteristic of classification.Cells that group together to form a single organism use the principle of division of labour. In such a body design, Cells that group together to form a single organism would not be identical. Instead, groups of cells will carry out specialised functions. This makes a very basic distinction in the body designs of organisms. As a result, an Amoeba and a worm are very different in an Amoeba and a worm body design.Being able to produce one’s own food versus having to get food from outside would make very different body designs.The characteristics of body design used for classification of plants will be very different from those important for classifying animals. This is because the basic designs are different, based on the need to make the basic designs own food (plants), or acquire it (animals). Therefore, these design features (having a skeleton, for example) are to be used to make sub-groups, rather than making broad groups.All living things are identified and categorised on the basis of All living things body design in form and function. Some characteristics are likely to make more wide-ranging changes in body design than others. There is a role of time in this as well. So, once a certain body design comes into existence, a certain body design will shape the effects of all other subsequent design changes, simply because a certain body design already exists. In other words, characteristics that came into existence earlier are likely to be more basic than characteristics that have come into existence later. This means that the classification of life forms will be closely related to life forms evolution.Most life forms that are see today have arisen by an accumulation of changes in body design that allow the organism possessing them to survive better. Charles Darwin first described this idea of evolution in 1859 in Charles Darwin book, "The Origin of Species".