Cells were first discovered by Robert Hooke in 1665. Robert Hooke observed Cells in a cork slice with the help of a primitive microscope. Leeuwenhoek, with the improved microscope, discovered the free living cells in pond water for the first time. It was Robert Brown in 1831 who discovered the nucleus in the cell. Purkinje in 1839 coined the term ‘protoplasm’ for the fluid substance of the cell. The cell theory, that all the plants and animals are composed of cells and that the cell is the basic unit of life, was presented by two biologists, Schleiden and Schwann. The cell theory, that all the plants and animals are composed of cells and that the cell is the basic unit of life was further expanded by Virchow by suggesting that all cells arise from pre-existing cells. With the discovery of the electron microscope in 1940, it was possible to observe and understand the complex structure of the cell and it various organelles. The invention of magnifying lenses led to the discovery of the microscopic world. The invention of magnifying lenses is now known that a single cell may constitute a whole organism as in Amoeba,Chlamydomonas, Paramoecium and bacteria. a single cell may constitute a whole organism as in Amoeba,Chlamydomonas, Paramoecium and bacteria are called unicellular organisms (uni = single). On the other hand, many cells group together in a single body and assume different functions in many cells group together in a single body to form various body parts in multicellular organisms (multi = many) such as some fungi, plants and animals. Every multi-cellular organism has come from a single cell. Cells divide to produce cells of Cells own kind. Cells thus come from pre-existing cells.The shape and size of cells are related to the specific function The shape and size of cells perform. Some cells like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some cases the cell shape could be more or less fixed and peculiar for a particular type of cell; for example, nerve cells have a typical shape.Each living cell has the capacity to perform certain basic functions that are characteristic of all living forms. We know that there is a division of labour in multicellular organisms such as human beings. This means that different parts of the human body perform different functions. the human body has a heart to pump blood, a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly, division of labour is also seen within a single cell. In fact, each such cell has got certain specific components within each such cell known as cell organelles. Each kind of cell organelle performs a special function, such as making new material in each such cell, clearing up the waste material from each such cell and so on. A cell is able to live and perform all A cell functions because of cell organelles. cell organelles together constitute the basic unit called each such cell. It is interesting that all cells are found to have the same organelles, no matter what all cells function is or what organism all cells are found in.The plasma membrane allows or permits the entry and exit of some materials in and out of each such cell. The plasma membrane also prevents movement of some other materials. The plasma membrane, therefore, is called a selectively permeable membrane.Some substances like carbon dioxide or oxygen can move across The plasma membrane by a process called diffusion.Something similar to this happens in cells when, for example, some substance like CO2 (which is cellular waste and requires to be excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high concentrations inside the cell. In the cell’s external environment, the concentration of CO2 is low as compared to that inside the cell. As soon as there is a difference of concentration of CO2 inside and outside a cell, CO2 moves out of the cell, from a region of high concentration, to a region of low concentration outside the cell by the process of diffusion. Similarly, O2 enters the cell by the process of diffusion when the level or concentration of O2 inside the cell decreases. Thus, diffusion plays an important role in gaseous exchange between the cells as well as the cell and as well external environment.Water also obeys the law of diffusion. The movement of water molecules through such a selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis. The movement of water molecules through such a selectively permeable membrane is also affected by the amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus, osmosis is the passage of water from a region of high water concentration through a selectively permeable membrane to a region of low water concentration till equilibrium is reached.If the medium surrounding the cell has a higher water concentration than the cell, meaning that the outside solution is very dilute, the cell will gain water by osmosis. Such a solution is known as a hypotonic solution. Water molecules are free to pass across the cell membrane in both directions, but more water will come into the cell than will leave. The net (overall) result is that water enters the cell. the cell is likely to swell up. If the medium has exactly the same water concentration as the cell, there will be no net movement of water across the cell membrane. Such a solution is known as an isotonic solution. Water crosses the cell membrane in both directions, but the amount going in is the same as the amount going out, so there is no overall movement of water. the cell will stay the same size.If the medium has a lower concentration of water than the cell, meaning that it is a very concentrated solution, the cell will lose water by osmosis. Such a solution is known as a hypertonic solution. Again, water crosses the cell membrane in both directions, but this time more water leaves the cell than enters the cell. Therefore the cell will shrink.Thus, osmosis is a special case of diffusion through a selectively permeable membrane.Unicellular freshwater organisms and most plant cells tend to gain water through osmosis. Absorption of water by plant roots is also an example of osmosis. Thus, diffusion is important in exhange of gases and water in the life of a cell. In additions to this, the cell also obtains nutrition from the cell environment. Different molecules move in and out of the cell through a type of transport requiring use of energy. a selectively permeable membrane is flexible and is made up of organic molecules called lipids and proteins. However, we can observe the structure of a selectively permeable membrane only through an electron microscope. The flexibility of a selectively permeable membrane also enables the cell to engulf in food and other material from its external environment. Amoeba are known as endocytosis. Amoeba acquires Amoeba food through such processes.Plant cells, in addition to a selectively permeable membrane, have another rigid outer covering called the cell wall. the cell wall lies outside a selectively permeable membrane. the cell wall is mainly composed of cellulose. Cellulose is a complex substance and provides structural strength to plants. When a living plant cell loses water through osmosis there is shrinkage or contraction of the contents of a living plant cell away from the cell wall. This phenomenon is known as plasmolysis.Cell walls permit the cells of plants, fungi and bacteria to withstand very dilute (hypotonic) external media without bursting. In such media the cells of plants, fungi and bacteria tend to take up water by osmosis. a living plant cell swells, building up pressure against the cell wall. the cell wall exerts an equal pressure against the swollen cell. Because of their walls, such cells can withstand much greater changes in the surrounding medium than animal cells.The nucleus has a double layered covering called nuclear membrane. called nuclear membrane has pores which allow the transfer of material from inside The nucleus to called nuclear membrane outside, that is, to the cytoplasm.The nucleus contains chromosomes, which are visible as rod-shaped structures only when a living plant cell is about to divide. Chromosomes contain information for inheritance of characters from parents to next generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chromosomes are composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules contain the information necessary for constructing and organising cells. Functional segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell which is not dividing, Functional segments of DNA is present as part of chromatin material. Chromatin material is visible as entangled mass of thread like structures. Whenever the cell is about to divide, Chromatin material gets organised into chromosomes. The nucleus plays a central role in cellular reproduction, the process by which a single cell divides and forms two new cells. The nucleus also plays a crucial part, along with the environment, in determining the way the cell will develop and what form the cell will exhibit at maturity, by directing the chemical activities of the cell. In some organisms like bacteria, the nuclear region of the cell may be poorly defined due to the absence of a nuclear membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region containing only nucleic acids is called a nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes. Organisms with cells having a nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes. Prokaryotic cells also lack most of the other cytoplasmic organelles present in eukaryotic cells. Many of the functions of such organelles are also performed by poorly organised parts of the cytoplasm. The chlorophyll in photosynthetic prokaryotic bacteria is associated with membranous vesicles but not with plastids as in eukaryotic cells.the cytoplasm is the fluid content inside a selectively permeable membrane. the cytoplasm also contains many specialised cell organelles. Each of many specialised cell organelles performs a specific function for the cell. Cell organelles are enclosed by membranes. In prokaryotes, beside the absence of a defined nuclear region, Cell organelles are also absent. On the other hand, Prokaryotic cells have nuclear membrane as well as membrane-enclosed organelles. The significance of membranes can be illustrated with the example of viruses. Viruses lack any membranes and hence do not show characteristics of life until Viruses enter a living body and use a living body cell machinery to multiply.Every cell has a membrane around Every cell to keep Every cell own contents separate from the external environment. Large and complex cells, including cells from multicellular organisms, need a lot of chemical activities to support Large and complex cells, including cells from multicellular organisms complicated structure and function. To keep these activities of different kinds separate from each other, Prokaryotic cells use membrane-bound little structures (or ‘organelles’) within Prokaryotic cells. This is one of the features of the eukaryotic cells that distinguish Prokaryotic cells from prokaryotic cells. Some of Cell organelles are visible only with an electron microscope.The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a large network of membrane-bound tubes and sheets. It looks like long tubules or round or oblong bags (vesicles). a membrane around it is similar in structure to a membrane around it. There are two types of ER– rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). RER looks rough under a microscope because RER has particles called ribosomes attached to RER surface. The ribosomes, which are present in all active cells, are the sites of protein manufacture. The manufactured proteins are then sent to various places in the cell depending on need, using the ER. The SER helps in the manufacture of fat molecules, or lipids, important for cell function. Some of these proteins and lipids help in building a membrane around it. This process is known as membrane biogenesis. Some other proteins and lipids function as enzymes and hormones. Although the ER varies greatly in appearance in different cells, the ER always forms a network system.Thus, one function of the ER is to serve as channels for the transport of materials (especially proteins) between various regions of the cytoplasm or between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. the ER the ER also functions as a cytoplasmic framework providing a surface The Golgi apparatus, first described by Camillo Golgi, consists of a system of membrane-bound vesicles (flattened sacs) arranged approximately parallel to each other in stacks called cisterns. membranes often have connections with the membranes of the ER and therefore constitute another portion of a complex cellular membrane system. The material synthesised near the ER the ER is packaged and dispatched to various targets inside and outside the cell through the Golgi apparatus. the cell functions include the storage, modification and packaging of products in vesicles. In some cases, complex sugars may be made from simple sugars in the Golgi apparatus. the Golgi apparatus is also involved in the formation of lysosomes. Camillo Golgi was born at Corteno near Brescia in 1843. Camillo Golgi studied medicine at the University of Pavia. After graduating in 1865, Camillo Golgi continued to work in Pavia at the Hospital of St. Matteo. At that time most of Camillo Golgi investigations were concerned with the nervous system, In 1872 Camillo Golgi accepted the post of Chief Medical Officer at the Hospital for the Chronically Sick at Abbiategrasso. Camillo Golgi first started Camillo Golgi investigations into the nervous system in a little kitchen of this hospital, which Camillo Golgi had converted into a laboratory. However, the work of greatest importance, which Camillo Golgi carried out was a revolutionary method of staining individual nerve and cell structures. a revolutionary method of staining individual nerve and cell structures is referred to as the ‘black reaction’. a revolutionary method of staining individual nerve and cell structures uses a weak solution of silver nitrate and is particularly valuable in tracing the processes and most delicate ramifications of cells. All through Camillo Golgi life, Camillo Golgi continued to work on these lines, modifying and improving this technique. Golgi received the highest honours and awards in recognition of Camillo Golgi work. Camillo Golgi shared the Nobel prize in 1906 with Santiago Ramony Cajal for their work on the structure of the nervous system. Structurally, Lysosomes are membrane-bound sacs filled with digestive enzymes. digestive enzymes are made by RER. Lysosomes are a kind of waste disposal system of the cell. These help to keep the cell clean by digesting any foreign material as well as worn-out cell organelles. Foreign materials entering the cell, such as bacteria or food, as well as old organelles end up in the lysosomes, which break complex substances into simpler substances. Lysosomes are able to do this because Lysosomes contain powerful digestive enzymes capable of breaking down all organic material. During the disturbance in cellular metabolism, for example, when the cell gets damaged, lysosomes may burst and digestive enzymes digest digestive enzymes own cell. Therefore, lysosomes are also known as the ‘suicide bags’ of a cell. Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses of the cell. Mitochondria have two membrane coverings. The outer membrane is porous while The outer membrane is deeply folded. These folds increase surface area for ATPgenerating chemical reactions. The energy required for various chemical activities needed for life is released by mitochondria in the form of ATP (Adenosine triphopshate) molecules. ATP is known as the energy currency of the cell. The body uses energy stored in ATP for making new chemical compounds and for mechanical work. Mitochondria are strange organelles in the sense that Mitochondria have Mitochondria own DNA and ribosomes. Therefore, mitochondria are able to make some of mitochondria own proteins. Plastids are present only in plant cells. There are two types of plastids – chromoplasts (coloured plastids) and leucoplasts (white or colourless plastids). Chromoplasts containing the pigment chlorophyll are known as chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are important for photosynthesis in plants. Chloroplasts also contain various yellow or orange pigments in addition to chlorophyll. Leucoplasts are primarily organelles in which materials such as starch, oils and protein granules are stored. The internal organisation of the Chloroplast consists of numerous membrane layers embedded in a material called the stroma. These are similar to mitochondria in external structure. Like mitochondria in external structure, plastids also have mitochondria in external structure own DNA and ribosomes. Vacuoles are storage sacs for solid or liquid contents. Vacuoles are small sized in animal cells while plant cells have very large vacuoles. The central vacuole of some plant cells may occupy 50-90% of the cell volume. In plant cells vacuoles are full of cell sap and provide turgidity and rigidity to the cell. Many substances of importance in the life of the plant cell are stored in vacuoles. These include amino acids, sugars, various organic acids and some proteins. In single-celled organisms like Amoeba, the food vacuole contains the food items that the Amoeba has consumed. In some unicellular organisms, specialised vacuoles also play important roles in expelling excess water and some wastes from the cell. Each cell thus acquires Each cell structure and ability to function because of the organisation of Each cell membrane and organelles in specific ways. Each cell thus has a basic structural organisation. This helps the cells to perform functions like respiration, obtaining nutrition, and clearing of waste material, or forming new proteins. Thus, Each cell is the fundamental structural unit of living organisms. Each cell is also the basic functional unit of life. New cells are formed in organisms in order to grow, to replace old, dead and injured cells, and to form gametes required for reproduction. The process by which new cells are made is called cell division. There are two main types of cell division: mitosis and meiosis. The process of cell division by which most of New cells divide for growth is called mitosis. In The process of cell division by which most of the cells divide for growth, each cell called mother cell divides to form two identical daughter cells. two identical daughter cells have the same number of chromosomes as mother cell. two identical daughter cells helps in growth and repair of tissues in organisms. Specific cells of reproductive organs or tissues in animals and plants divide to form gametes, which after fertilisation give rise to offspring. offspring divide by a different process called meiosis which involves two consecutive divisions. When a cell divides by meiosis a cell produces four new cells instead of just two. two identical daughter cells only have half the number of chromosomes than that of two identical daughter cells. 