In unicellular organisms, a single cell performs all basic functions. For example, in Amoeba, a single cell carries out movement, intake of food, gaseous exchange and excretion. But in multicellular organisms there are millions of cells. Most of cells are specialised to carry out specific functions. Each specialised function is taken up by a different group of cells. Since cells carry out only a particular function, cells do it very efficiently. In human beings, muscle cells contract and relax to cause movement, nerve cells carry messages, blood flows to transport oxygen, food, hormones and waste material and so on. In plants, vascular tissues conduct food and water from one part of the plant to other parts. So, multi-cellular organisms show division of labour. Cells specialising in one function are often grouped together in the body. This means that a particular function is carried out by a cluster of cells at a definite place in the body. This cluster of cells, called a tissue, is arranged and designed so as to give the highest possible efficiency of function. Blood, phloem and muscle are all examples of tissues. A group of cells that are similar in structure and/or work together to achieve a particular function forms a tissue. Plants are stationary or fixed – Plants don’t move. Since Plants have to be upright, Plants have a large quantity of supportive tissue. supportive tissue generally has dead cells. Animals on the other hand move around in search of food, mates and shelter. Animals on the other hand move around in search of food, mates and shelter consume more energy as compared to plants. Most of the tissues Animals on the other hand move around in search of food, mates and shelter contain are living. Another difference between animals and plants is in the pattern of growth. The growth in plants is limited to certain regions, while this is not so in animals. There are some tissues in plants that divide throughout some tissues in plants that divide throughout their life life. some tissues in plants that divide throughout their life are localised in certain regions. Based on the dividing capacity of some tissues in plants that divide throughout their life, various plant tissues can be classified as growing or meristematic tissue and permanent tissue. Cell growth in animals is more uniform. So, there is no such demarcation of dividing and nondividing regions in animals. The structural organisation of organs and organ systems is far more specialised and localised in complex animals than even in very complex plants. This fundamental difference reflects the different modes of life pursued by these two major groups of organisms, particularly in these two major groups of organisms different feeding methods. Also, these two major groups of organisms are differently adapted for a sedentary existence on one hand (plants) and active locomotion on the other (animals), contributing to this difference in organ system design. New cells produced by meristem are initially like those of meristem itself, but as those of meristem itself grow and mature, those of meristem itself characteristics slowly change and those of meristem itself become differentiated as components of other tissues. Apical meristem is present at the growing tips of stems and roots and increases the length of the stem and the root. The girth of the stem or root increases due to lateral meristem (cambium). Intercalary meristem seen in some plants is located near the node.Cells of meristematic tissue are very active, Cells of meristematic tissue have dense cytoplasm, thin cellulose walls and prominent nuclei. Cells of meristematic tissue lack vacuoles.Differentiation leads to the development of various types of permanent tissues. A few layers of cells beneath the epidermis are generally simple permanent tissue. Parenchyma is the most common simple permanent tissue. Parenchyma consists of relatively unspecialised cells with thin cell walls. relatively unspecialised cells with thin cell walls are living cells. relatively unspecialised cells with thin cell walls are usually loosely arranged, thus large spaces between cells are found in simple permanent tissue. simple permanent tissue generally stores food.